The Classic Approach:

The classic mystery is popular fiction which follows a specific formula. Clever writers may try to change the formula, but the most clever will cling to it for a very good reason. They work within the bounds of the formula because it works!
The following outline serves the modern mystery novel, as defined by editors and publishers. A typical story will contain 60,000 to 65,000 words (205 manuscript pages) and will be divided into 12 chapters, each approximately 17 pages in length.

The Classic 12-Chapter Mystery Formula
Act I
Introduction of the crime (mystery) and the sleuth
Chapter 1
A. Disclose the crime and mystery to be solved. The crime must capture the imagination. It should have been committed in an extraordinary way and either the victim the perpetuator, or both, should be unusual. Give the reader enough information about the victim to make them truly care that the perpetrator is found out and that justice is served.
B. Early in the story, clues should be revealed which suggest both physical and psychological aspects of the initial crime. Those clues should point to suspects and motive which will carry the sleuth to the end of Act I. Some clues should point the sleuth in the right direction, others may not be obvious or be recognized as actual clues unto later in the story.
C. Introduce the sleuth who will solve the crime early, and have him or her do or say something very clever or unexpected which will establish that person as unique. Create this character with care. His or her personality should be interesting enough to sustain the interest of the reader to the very last page. (or through an entire series of books). It is not necessary to disclose all aspects of the sleuth’s personality at the onset. Let the description unfold gradually to sustain interest. Do reveal enough background to let the reader understand the world in which the protagonist functions. (Small town sheriff, Scotland Yard detective, Pinkerton agent in the old West, country squire, investigative reporter in New York City, etc.)
D. Ground the reader in the time and place where the crime occurs. It is often useful to include some sort of symbol, an object or a person, in the opening scene which serves as a metaphor for what occurs in the story. The reappearance of this symbol at the conclusion of the story will create a certain organic unity.
E. Begin with a dramatic event. Some writers offer a prologue, describing the execution of the crime in detail, as it occurs, possible from the point of view of the victim or perpetrators. The same information could also be revealed by a character, through dialogue. Sufficient details should be furnished to allow the reader to experience the event as though he or she were actually there. Another good opening would be to put the sleuth in a dire situation and allow detail of the crime to unfold in due course.

Chapter 2
A. Set the sleuth on the path toward solving he mystery. Offer plausible suspects, all of whom appear to have had motive, means and opportunity to to commit the crime. Select the most likely suspects, and have the sleuth question them. One of these suspects will turn out to be the actual perpetrator.
B. At the approximate mid-point of Act 1, something should occur which makes it clear to the reader that the crime is more complicated than originally thought. Hints may be given to allow the reader to actually see possibilities not yet known to the sleuth.

Chapter 3
A. The sub-plot should be introduced. The plot will continue to maintain the progress of the story, but the sub-plot will carry the theme, which is a universal concept to which the reader can identify. Sub-plots tend to originate either in a crisis in the sleuth’s private life, or in the necessity of the sleuth to face a dilemma involving a matter of character, such as courage or honesty.

B. The ultimate resolution of the sub-plot with demonstrate change or growth on the part of the protagonist, and will climatic on a personal or professional level. That climax may coincide with, or occur as prelude to the climax of the main plot. The sub-plot may be a vehicle for a romantic interest or a confrontation with personal demons of the sleuth. The author can manipulate the pace of the novel by moving back and forth between the plot and sub-plot.

Act II
Direct the investigation toward a conclusion which later proves to be erroneous.
Chapter 4
A. Reveal facts about suspects, through interrogations and the discovery of clues.
B. Flight, or disappearance of one or more suspect.
C. Develop a sense of urgency. Raise the stakes or make it evident that if the mystery is not solved soon, there will be terrible consequences.

Chapter 5
A. The investigation should broaden to put suspicion on other characters.
B. Information gathered through interviews or the discovery of physical evidence, should point toward the solution, although the relevance may not yet be apparent.

Chapter 6
A. The sleuth’s background is revealed as the sub-plot is developed. Tell the reader what drives the protagonist, what haunts or is missing in his or her life.
B. Make it clear that the sleuth has a personal stake in the outcome, either because of threat to his or her life, or the possibility of revelation of matters deeply disturbing to the protagonist on an emotional level.

Act III
Change of focus and scope of the investigation. This is the pivotal point in the story where it become evident that the sleuth was on the wrong track. Something unexpected occurs, such as the appearance of a second body, the death of a major suspect, or discovery of evidence which clears the most likely suspect. The story must take a new direction.
Chapter 7
A. Reveal hidden motives. Formerly secret relationships come to light, such as business arrangements, romantic involvement's, scores to be settled or previously veiled kinships.
B. Develop and expose meanings of matters hinted at in Act I., to slowly clarify the significance of earlier clues.

Chapter 8
A. The sleuth reveals the results of the investigation. The reader, as well as the protagonist and other characters, are given an opportunity to review what is known and assess the possibilities.
B. The solution of the crime appears to be impossible. Attempts to solve the crime have stymied the sleuth. Misinterpretation of clues or mistaken conclusions have lead him or her in the wrong direction, and logic must be applied to force a new way of grasping an understanding of the uncertainties.

Chapter 9
A. Have the sleuth review the case to determine where he or she went wrong.
B. Reveal the chain of events which provoked the crime.
C. The crucial evidence is something overlooked in Act I, which appeared to have been of little consequence at the time it was first disclosed. That evidence takes on new meaning with information disclosed in Act III.
D. The sleuth (and perhaps the reader, if a keep observer) becomes aware of the error which remains undisclosed to the other characters.

Act IV
Solution

Chapter 10
A. The sleuth weighs the evidence and information gleaned from the other characters.
B. Based on what only he or she now knows, the sleuth must seek positive proof to back up the yet undisclosed conclusion.

Chapter 11
A. Resolution of the sub-plot
B. The protagonist, having been tested by his or her private ordeal, is strengthened for the final action leading to the actual solution of the mystery.

Chapter 12
A. The Climax - a dramatic confrontation between the sleuth and the perpetrator in which the sleuth prevails. The more “impossible” the odds have been, the more rewarding the climax will be.
B. Resolution - Revelation of clues and the deductive process which lead to the solution. Establish that the case has been solved and justice has been served to the satisfaction of all involved (except, the villain).

A. Have the sleuth review the case to determine where he or she went wrong.
B. Reveal the chain of events which provoked the crime.
C. The crucial evidence is something overlooked in Act I, which appeared to have been of little consequence at the time it was first disclosed. That evidence takes on new meaning with information disclosed in Act III.
D. The sleuth (and perhaps the reader, if a keep observer) becomes aware of the error which remains undisclosed to the other characters.

Act IV
Solution

Chapter 10
A. The sleuth weighs the evidence and information gleaned from the other characters.
B. Based on what only he or she now knows, the sleuth must seek positive proof to back up the yet undisclosed conclusion.

Chapter 11
A. Resolution of the sub-plot
B. The protagonist, having been tested by his or her private ordeal, is strengthened for the final action leading to the actual solution of the mystery.

Chapter 12

A. The Climax - a dramatic confrontation between the sleuth and the perpetrator in which the sleuth prevails. The more “impossible” the odds have been, the more rewarding the climax will be.
B. Resolution - Revelation of clues and the deductive process which lead to the solution. Establish that the case has been solved and justice has been served to the satisfaction of all involved (except, the villain).


1. The Straight Mystery - a character driven story in which the action just happens to center around a crime, often a murder. Excellent examples include the works of Georges Simenon, creator of the French detective, Inspector Jules Maigret.
2. The Puzzle Mystery - the classic detective story in which a problem is posed and the writer toys with the reader, in a sort of cat and mouse game. Matching wits with clever detectives, makes these mysteries addictive to loyal readers. Examples include the stories ofAgatha Christie and Ellery Queen, two of the most prolific and popular mystery writers of all time.
3. The Hard-boiled Mystery - an adventure story which may be a puzzle or whodunit, but is primarily focused on the physical exploits of a protagonist, usually a private detective, who approaches super-hero status. Among the best examples are those of John D. McDonald andMickey Spillane.
4. The Novel of Pursuit - a story which often involves espionage or other action which will cause the reader to ask not who or how, but what will happen next? Finding out how the protagonist will get of of the situation is the essence of this kind of story. Action and terror, and frequently technology and the methods of pursuit, entrapment or capture are more important than the internal motivations and psychology of the characters. These stories are plot-driven, rather than character-driven. Examples include Geoffrey Household and Eric Ambler. Sub-catagories of the Novel of Pursuit include:
a. The Spy Novel - a story in which a agent is pitted against his opposite number, or even his superiors within his spy organization. Cold war themes are easily adapted to this sup-catagory. The best examples are the works of Ian Fleming and John Le Carré.
b. The Man-on-the-Run Mystery - a mystery story revolving around a protagonist in fleeing from the forces of evil. These stories tend to be international in scope, dealing with ruthless regimes and terror. One good example would be Alistair Maclean.
c. The Metaphysical Mystery - Dark stories of a gothic or occult nature, inv.kirjasto.sci.fi/maclean.htm”>Alistair Maclean. olving supernatural elements, such as demonic possession, black masses, voodoo, ghosts and other facets of the para-normal. The modern master of this sub-catagory is Stephen King.
d. The Doomsday Mystery - a story in which the threat is global and the means are nucelar distruction, chemical warfare or some sort of catistrophic plague. Several of the James Bond stories by Ian Fleming fit this sub-catagory.
5. The Whodunit - a character-driven story in which the solution of a crime should come as a surprise to the reader, but in which the personality, actions and character of the sleuth are featured more than the revelation of the deductive process (See puzzle mystery). Examples include the stories of Tony Hillerman and Dick Francis. Sub-catagories of the classic whodunit include:
a. The Caper Mystery is a mystery in which the reader is shown the perpetrator and is privy to the step-by-step planning for the execution of the crime. An example would be Topkapi by Eric Ambler.
b. The Cozy Mystery - a story may take place in New England or a rural English setting. An amateur sleuth solves a mystery. The crime, although invariably fatal, is not graphic or violent. The characters tend to dress for dinner and sip tea. The Agatha Christie Miss Marple books are excellent examples of this sub-catgory.
c. The Romantic Suspence Mystery - also known as the “Woman in Jeopardy Mystery” is basically a romantic tale in which the relationship between the heroine and her beloved is the focus of the story. Examples are almost too abundant to mention, but the works of Mary Higgins Clark are a good starting place.
d. The Period Mystery - a classic whodunit in which the action takes place in the past. Social and political themes as well as the dress and manners of the period are featured and are usually revelant to the solution of the crime. Some of the most endearing are those of the Regency Period and American Civil War era, but they may take place in any historical period. Barbara Michaels(a/k/a Barbara Mertz & Elizabeth Peters) is a good example.
e. The Western Mystery - a mystery story, of any catagory or sub-type, which has a western setting and in which the values and customs of the American West contribute to the action and solution of the mystery. Examples would include Tony Hillerman.
f. The Socio-Political Mystery - a story in which the protagonist battles political adversaries, techological disasters and/or social upheaval. Writers of this sub-type include Jack Higgins and P. D. James
g. The Police Procedural Mystery - a story involving a police detective who solves a crime, or series of crimes, using techniques and procedures available to modern law enforcement agencies. A fine example would be Ed McBain, creator of Hill Street Blues.


h. The Private Eye Mystery is a mystery in which a private investigator, as opposed to a police detective, solves the crime. The investigator may be in the employ of a detective agency, insurance company, law firm, or may even be a private citizen. One of the best examples is the creator of Nero Wolfe, Rex Stout


i. The Psychological Mystery - a story of inner conflict and the interactions of the principle protagonist and related characters, in the process of solving a crime. Kidnapping an murder are the usual crimes in this sub-type. Examples include the late Stanley Ellin.
j. The Techno-Thriller - a large scale mystery involving the political or busines world in which techology plays a major role. Examples include the man credited with originating the catagory, Tom Clancy.
k. The Vigilante Mysery - a variation on the theme of the classic whodunit in which the “who” is disclosed early and the action of the story is focused on the pursuit, aprehension of the ciminal and bringing him to justice. One example isTom Clancy.
l. The Camp Mystery - any of the above, presented in an off-beat, comical way, just for fun. Among the masters of this light-hearted sub-catagory, is Donald E. Westlake
